# 28. How to set up Android Picture-in-picture mode? (a.k.a Floating window)

## How to set up Android Picture-in-picture mode? (a.k.a Floating window)



My name is Mohsen, and I am back with another video about Android Picture-in-Picture API, and while learning how it works, we will apply some of the best practices using this API.\


Before we dive in, allow me to invite you to subscribe to this channel if you are interested in Android Development tips and hit the bell button to get notified whenever there is a new video.



With that said, make sure not to miss my interviews with Android community active members. You will find a real gem among those talks.

The talks are also available as podcast version. You just have to search for “Android Developer Tips” channel on your favorite podcast app.



Now, Let's dive into the Android Picture-in-Picture API,



Starting in API Level 26 (a.k.a Android 8.0) the system allows activities to

lunch in Picture-in-Picture mode. This mode is mostly used for video

playback, but good to know that, except for the small window size

and having no user interaction, it works as a normal-sized Activity.



The Picture-in-Picture uses multi-window APIs.



I have a sample application which uses ExoPlayer to play a short video from the project raw folder in a loop.

Also as a good user experience, when the activity goes to background and onPause method gets called I pause the video, and onResume I start playing again.\


To add Picture-in-Picture to your app, you need to define your activities that should support this mode in your manifest by setting supports picture in picture true.



// CODE android: supports Picture In Pictures true



Also, you should specify that your Activity will handle the layout

configuration changes, so it doesn't relaunch when the layout change occurs during picture in picture mode transitions.\


// CODE android:configChanges = “...”



In the sample app I have a button which I am going to use for switching to picture in picture mode.

First we need to ask package manager if picture in picture feature is supported. Using the lazy delegation we can make sure this value will be extracted after activity is created.\


Like all new APIs, if your app supports older Android APIs you need to wrap this code inside an sdk version check if block.\


Now using the isPipSupported value we can decide to proceed or skip executing the user request. Ofcurse a better user experience is to not showing the picture in picture button if this feature is not supported instead of ignoring user interaction.



To enter the Picture-in-Picture mode, an Activity must call enterPictureInPictureMode method and pass some params.



I am going to use a function called getPipParams for generating the picture in picture parameters.



The Picture in Picture params class has a builder that we should use to set required settings before asking system to switch to pip mode.



For example I will set aspect ratio of the Picture in picture window based on my video 16 to 9.



I will also set source rectangle hint which will be used by the system for a smooth transition between Picture-in-Picture and fullscreen mode.



This block should also get wrapped an sdk version check if block if your app supports older Android APIs.



// CODE Set Picture In PictmeParans L Builder Aspect Ration Source Rect hint 1 Auto Enter (true) Build



Let’s run the app and test the PIP button.\


As you can see, the player goes to Picture in picture mode and user can move it around the screen or get back to the full mode, but we are also showing unnecessary content like video title in this mode.



Let fix this issue…



To properly Handle UI during Picture-in-Picture mode, you should override the "onPictureInPictureModeChanged" callback to hide or slow UI elements that you want in Picture-in-Picture mode.



Another issue is that the video pauses when we switch to picture in picture mode because of "onPause" and "onResume" lifecycle callbacks by entering and leaving Picture-in-Picture mode. To fix this we can check "isInPictureInPictureMode" value and make sure that our content keeps running if it is just a switch to or from Picture-in-Picture mode.



// CODE onPause { if (isPictueInPicture mode) // keep playing else // pause video



There is a callback called "onUserLeaveHint" to get notified when the user is intended to leave your app and decide if you want to continue showing your content in Picture-in-Picture mode or not, but since Android 12 the apps can set "autoEnterEnabled" instead of waiting for the "onUserLeaveHint" callback, which means you can setup

Picture-in-Picture parameters before head. For example, when your video playback or navigation starts.



For sure, you can disable Picture-in-Picture auto-enter when your content is paused.



For testing this feature I need to setup an emulator running API level 31 or higher cause my current one is 30.



By running the app you will notice that pressing the home button acts like pressing the pip button and our content keeps running even though the user has theoretically left our app.



As I mentioned before, users cannot interact with your UI in Picture-in-Picture mode, and also, you have a tiny window to show details.

Instead, the Picture-in-Picture window can display controls when the user taps the window to interact.



If your app has an active media session then play, pause, next, and previous controls will appear automatically on top of your content window.



In this example app I don’t have it, but I would like to define a custom actions using the Picture-in-Picture Params builder's "setActions" method before entering Picture-in-Picture mode. You can also set the action when calling "enterPictureInPictureMode" with proper params.



For every action we should create a remove action object which require an icon, a title a content description for accessibility and a pending intent.



For icon I am going to insert a vector asset from material icons.



I will set title as more info, and content description as more info actions.



Now lets create a pending intent which will opens this youtube channel.



Now that the remote action is ready, we need to create a list of it.

Just keep in mind, that the number of actions you can add is limited, and you may want to check "getMaxNumPictureInPictureActions" first.



As the final tip, if you set your activity launch mode to the single task you can allow your users to switch to the Picture-in-Picture mode without leaving the app. For example, let's say you can let them watch a video in a floating window on top of the videos playlist activity.\


\
