# 8. 10 tips for having a good Git commit and Pull request

## 10 tips for having a good Git commit and Pull request a.k.a Merge request

Hello Android developers.

My name is Mohsen, and today, I want to talk about 10 Tips for having a good git commit and pull request.

Before we start please subscribe to this channel if you haven't already and turn on the notification bell to get informed when there is a new video.

Let’s start...

### #1 Follow the single responsibility principle&#x20;

Avoid falling down the rabbit holes. commit changes should be single-responsible. Focus on what you are working on while working on a feature and overcome the temptation to change or refactor codes.

One suggestion is to create a list of your findings so first Free your mind by writing it down and second share it with your team later.

For sharing purposes, you can also create a tech debt Jira ticket or GitHub issue to make it more transparent.

### #2 Commit message should speak for itself

Always keep in mind that with your commit message or pull request description you are talking to another human and you are not codding anymore. You are writing a history for the future developers, then make sure your commit messages are short, clean, and self-explanatory.

Your commit messages should also have the potential to become your pull request description without any changes and get your reviewer’s approval.

Git commit messages have a first line which is called subject and the rest which are details.

The subject should complete this sentence short and right to the point: "This commit will ..."

For instance:

* remove deprecated method X
* release version 1.0.0
* refactor feature X for readability

The Detail part should include:

* What your commit does
* Why are you doing it like the ticket or issue number
* How it is done

Your team may also agree on a predefined template for both commit messages and pull requests that you can add to your project git repo.

### #3. Feature Breaking

As a rule of thumb short pull requests, get faster and higher quality reviews. Studies show that a pull request shouldn't go higher than 250 lines of code changes to receive a fast and high-quality review. Therefore break your feature into smaller working parts. It means they shouldn’t break the build or the app functionality.

Another positive point about small changes is that they get merged fast and this avoids keeping a branch for a long time and as a result no merge conflicts.

### #4. Automate using Continuous Integration (CI)

Every commit should be built independently from other commits. By setting up a CI service like GitHub Actions make sure your commit builds and all unit tests are passing and you didn’t break a thing.

Add Ktlint, Detekt, and Android lint to make sure you keep the code quality as it was before and always improving and going forward.

### #5 Level up your pull requests with screenshots

If you are working on a feature that has a UI then why not adding some screenshots of your great job to your pull request descriptions?

This way the reviewers also get on board faster about what you changed and how it looks like.

You can also go further and add some GIFs if your UI has an animation.

### #6 Issue/Tickets integrations

GitHub issues or Jira tickets come with repo integrations which means you can refer to their IDs and they get informed which commit is related to the issue or ticket.

You can also go further with integration and use keywords like "fix" or "close" to close an issue or move a ticket forward to the next stage in the workflow.

### #7 merge, rebase, and squash

Your branch can be merged, rebased, or squashed to the main branch. I don’t want to go deep with the pros and cons of every method, but I suggest come to an agreement with your team and keep doing it.

You can also choose a branching strategy like Git Flow or Trunk-based development or even come up with a solution that works for your team and project and follow to have a way of doing things and make sure everyone is on board.

### #8 Emojis speak louder than words

Your pull request reviews usually happen async and emoji are a cool way to express feeling about what you are talking about. Also, you can use them in reaction to what a reviewer suggested.

Meanwhile, your team can also agree on defining a special meaning for some emojis. For instance, a light bulb means an improvement suggestion that is not a blocker from the reviewer’s perspective.

Also, don't be afraid to show your excitement about your colleague’s fantastic job with a nice gif!

### #9 Explain before being asked

Some commit might need some explanation about edge cases and what issues you faced while doing the task.&#x20;

You already did the changes which means you as the commit author should know exactly which part of the code needs some details about why and how you did it to give some insight and make the review process faster and easier.

So be smart and open some info discussions on your pull request lines and explain those edge cases before a reviewer asks.

### #10 Talk with your team!

To have some ground rules that everyone agrees on and be on the same page set up a meeting and talk about what fits the most for your team and project. Also, don't be afraid of reviewing the rules that are already introduced by older developers.

I also suggest adding a git convention to your repo’s readme to be able to refer to and also make the life of the new team members easier.

### # Bonus Tip!

If you are a standalone developer with no teammates to review your commits. You can use this trick I used before which may sound nonsense!

Apply your changes and open the pull request, but leave it there and review it by yourself the other day with a fresh mind!

I assure you will always find a point to improve the other day.

Also, you can use the “rubber duck debugging” solution for code review by explaining what you did to a dummy duck or even talking about it with another developer who is not even an Android developer or go further and explain it to a non-developer colleague like a QA team member!



### Conclusion

Hope you found these points useful.

Please write in the comments which points you are already doing on daily basis and which points you will try in the future.



Plus share if you also have other rules or tricks in your team that improved your commits and pull requests code review quality.



I will add multiple links to different articles related to the points I talked about to the video description so you can study more if you are interested.

